# Euclidean Rhythms

---------------------------

### Introduction

Euclidean Rhythms are described in a 2005 paper by Godfried Toussaint entitled ['The Euclidean Algorithm Generates Traditional Musical Rhythms'](http://cgm.cs.mcgill.ca/~godfried/publications/banff.pdf), which describes the organisation of rhythm by placing onsets as evenly as possible within a number of possible spaces using Bjorklund's algorithm. It's not the easiest thing to verbally describe, but [this online tool](https://reprimande.github.io/euclideansequencer/) explains it much better, and the paper contains a bunch of illustrated examples.

As mentioned in 3.1, When I was learning how to perform Live Coding I found creating compelling, complex rhythm in SuperCollider quite hard. Euclidean Rhythms and the [Bjorklund quark](https://github.com/supercollider-quarks/Bjorklund) have ended up becoming major fixtures of my performance as a result as they handle a lot of the difficulties i have around developing rhythmic complexity in real-time as part of performance. I've always wanted to be able to make rhythms like [DJ Rashad](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SWTsLnYO68U), and using Euclidean Rhythms has got me some way n that quest.

### Effort-free rhythmic complexity

The problem I had with rhythm was in the fact that all rhythms for all proxies had to be specified as `dur` values, and each one had to be specified independently. Constructing TidalCycles-like 'riffs' containing multiple percussion samples is really quite hard in SuperCollider. As a result, most rhythms I ended up creating involved either using simple on-beat/off-beat patterns, or constraining a `Pwhite` or `Pexprand` into producing random rhythms in time with the ProxySpace tempo clock, and random rhythms with a uniform distribution generally sound quite boring.

The Bjorklund quark contains a few classes that help in using Euclidean Rhythms. I particularly use `Pbjorklund2`, which takes arguments for:

- `k`: Number of 'hits'
- `n`: Number of possible onsets
- `length`: Number of repeats
- `offset`: Starting onset in the pattern

and using this, outputs an array of durations for use as `dur` values in a pattern, for instance: `Pbjorklund2(3,8)` would produce duration arrays of `[ 3, 3, 2 ]`.

Because `Pbjorklund2` is a pattern class, it can be nested and have its arguments modulated by other pattern classes, using its inputs to generate sequences, rather than single values. In this way, 'random rhythms' create a much more interesting result, as random values will be used to create a network of onsets, which perceptually appear to be very complex interlocking rhythms.

```
//four 'randomised' rhythms, sounds okay.
(
p.clock.tempo = 2.2;
~k = Pbind(\instrument,\bplay,\buf,d["k"][1],\dur,Pwhite(0.25,1).round(0.25),\amp,1);
~sn = Pbind(\instrument,\bplay,\buf,d["s"][1],\dur,Pwhite(0.25,1).round(0.25),\amp,1);
~h = Pbind(\instrument,\bplay,\buf,d["ch"][1],\dur,Pwhite(0.25,1).round(0.25),\amp,1);
~t = Pbind(\instrument,\bplay,\buf,d["t"][0],\dur,Pwhite(0.25,1).round(0.25),\amp,1);
~k.play;
~sn.play;
~h.play;
~t.play;
)

//four randomised euclidean rhythms with four different samples.
//sounds better, producing a much greater variety of rhythmic forms.
(
p.clock.tempo = 2.2;
~k = Pbind(\instrument,\bplay,\buf,d["k"][1],\dur,Pbjorklund2(Pwhite(1,8),Pwhite(1,16))/4,\amp,1);
~sn = Pbind(\instrument,\bplay,\buf,d["s"][1],\dur,Pbjorklund2(Pwhite(1,8),Pwhite(1,16))/4,\amp,1);
~h = Pbind(\instrument,\bplay,\buf,d["ch"][1],\dur,Pbjorklund2(Pwhite(1,8),Pwhite(1,16))/4,\amp,1);
~t = Pbind(\instrument,\bplay,\buf,d["t"][0],\dur,Pbjorklund2(Pwhite(1,8),Pwhite(1,16))/4,\amp,1);
~k.play;
~sn.play;
~h.play;
~t.play;
)
```

### Euclidean Rhythms vs 4/4 kick



### The (3,8) pattern

### Using offsets

### Constraining 'randomness' using Bjorklund

### Convergence & Divergence, using variables inside ProxySpace 
