# Using Live Data with OSC

--------------

'Live Data' is a fairly ambiguous term, so I'll clear up what I mean:

I have done a set of performances that revolve around live coding and using data in the past, particularly performances where I have a continuous stream of data to interpret during the performance. These performances involve negotiating my relationship with sensor data (e.g. movement data, temperature, light levels), live-coding my interpretation of this data to deliver a performance.

For this type of performance I have used a particular set of technologies mutliple times, and have developed a reasonably quick way to work, which I will share here. Depending on the kind of data you want to use, some of the items described in this part of the guide may not apply to you directly, but using OSC to handle messages in SuperCollider is a really useful skill that can apply to many types of situation, so it's worth knowing if you want to work outside of SuperCollider at all.

[Open Sound Control](http://opensoundcontrol.org/introduction-osc) (hereafter OSC) is an _absurdly_ useful protocol for communicating between programs, and across networks.

Before I learned how to use it I heard people refer to it a lot as 'modern MIDI', which I think is a bit of a misnomer and actually confused me quite a lot while learning it as someone used to MIDI a la DAWs and plugging cables into synthesizers. While MIDI is a set of commonly understood messages between programs (plug a MIDI cable into an interface and you can expect your DAW to react in a certain way), OSC is more of a 'common language' that enables programs to communicate effectively. OSC is very useful for getting multiple programs and machines to 'talk' to each other, and I have found it very useful for performances involving multiple programs and machines running together.

For example:

[sampler-sampler](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dY6oSwoRRho) uses OSC to communicate information about emulated stitching between two machines and multiple programs:

MACHINE 1: Processing -> MACHINE 2: SuperCollider -> Processing

[tome.](http://www.charliedearnley.com/portfolio/tome/) uses OSC to parse sensor data and manage lighting.

Sensor array (serial data) -> [Python Serial Parser](https://github.com/theseanco/python-SerialToOSC) -> SuperCollider -> QLCPlus -> OpenDMXUSB

While the above setups might seem complex or convoluted, using OSC makes these connections very easy, and using OSC is very similar across platforms.

It's first worth understanding a bit about how OSC sends its messages:

Then talk about the _kinds_ of messages that can be sent

Then talk about building receivers

Then talk about using those messages within SuperCollider

Then talk about live coding them
