# Drones

-------

TODO: These links
[Drones]() [are]() [great](), both standing on their own as drone music or within other forms of music.

I've always found SuperCollider to be a really strong tool for making drones of all kinds as the types of subtle, durational modulations that can be achieved with `.kr` UGens allows for the creation of drones that vary over time very easily. The variation of these drones makes the background of sets interesting without having to maintain them directly - especially if the modulation in multiple drones are out of sync for instance. This sustained background interest can keep a set moving forward while time is spent working on preparing foreground elements without the background becoming boring too quickly (which is a problem I've come across a lot when performing live coding sets).

### DFM1

[sc3-plugins](https://github.com/supercollider/sc3-plugins) contains a great filter - [DFM1])(http://doc.sccode.org/Classes/DFM1.html). A 'Digitally Modelled Analog Filter', it is packed with features. It can be used a high pass and low pass, has a variable noise setting, and can self-oscillate at high resonances.

The most important feature of this for me is the self-oscillation. When overdriven, DFM1 produces a gorgeous 'warm' tone, which tends to distort softly the harder it is driven. 

When this self-oscillating distortion is paired with a sine wave using the same fundamental frequency as the filter, some rich drones are created:

```supercollider
TODO: DFM1 drone example, flesh it out with multiple drones
```

Another way to use DFM1 as an oscillator is to run it up and down the harmonic series and use it as a 'melody' alongside some already running drones:

```supercollider
TODO: put another DFM1 using a LFNoise1 to use the harmonic series on top of the previous example, this will sound really nice
```

It can also be used to turn existing sound sources into drones with high resonances.

```supercollider
TODO: Droning DFM1 field recordings maybe
```


